[ Background Music ]
>> And I think many people
today don't know what
to believe anymore.
>> People basically need to keep
on to help uncover
what really happened.
>> I felt like something
was watching me.
>> We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told the
entire story.
>> George Noory: And welcome
back to  Beyond Belief.
with our special guest from the
SETI Institute, that's Search
for Extra Terrestrial
Intelligence, Seth Shostak.
He's an astronomer.
Seth, welcome back.
How are you?
>> Seth Shostak: Good,
well, I'm still okay.
>> Noory: Good for you.
Astronomy.
It's been one of my
fascinations since I was a boy.
You have got to explain for
me the theory of the Big Bang,
because I still don't get it.
I don't understand how
something could blow
up from some minute particle
they keep talking about.
I don't get it.
>> Shostak: Yeah, well I don't
think anybody actually gets it.
I mean, that's one of
the big mysteries, right?
Nobody knows what, if you
will, caused the Big Bang.
We have this presumably
almost, maybe even,
infinitely small
volume of space --
well, no space, because space
is part of the universe,
that creates space
and everything in it.
I mean, you know,
that's so mind --
>> Noory: It makes no sense.
>> Shostak: It's
so mind boggling.
But look, the way it happened,
it became an observational
fact, right?
If you went back a hundred,
a hundred and twenty years
and you talked to astronomers
or anybody else and say,
so what about the universe?
Did it have a beginning?
Is it going to have an end?
And the conventional wisdom
then was, it's the same.
I mean, things don't
change very fast.
Oh, the planets go
around the sun.
You get a comet,
and stuff like that.
A little bit of dirty
chemistry we call life
on this world the earth.
But things basically
don't change.
The universe has always been
here, it will always be here.
Now, and that's the way --
>> Noory: It used to be.
>> Shostak: Yeah.
And then Einstein comes along.
And in 1915 he, you know,
works out general relativity.
He solves the equation.
He said, now wait a
minute, wait a minute.
These equations predict that the
universe can't just be static,
sort of the same forever.
It's got to either be expanding
or contracting according
to my math.
>> Noory: Or both.
>> Shostak: Well, it's got --
maybe for a period of
time it's expanding,
and then it's contracting.
It's got to do one or the other.
But in any case, and so he
goes to the astronomers.
He said, you know,
is it possible the universe
is expanding or contracting?
They said no, it's static.
It's not. Okay, and
he said, then I've got
to fix my equations and
he puts in a fudge factor.
Okay. But then, an astronomer
by the name of Ed Hubble.
Now, everybody knows
Edwin Hubble.
He measures, you
know, galaxies nearby.
And he finds that, well,
they're all moving away from us.
Okay, that's an observational
fact.
It says nothing about
why they're doing that.
They're all moving away.
>> Noory: And that's real.
>> Shostak: And that's real.
There's no doubt about that.
And in fact, if they're
farther way,
they're moving away
from us faster.
Okay, so imagine somebody had
the bad form to come in here
with a hand grenade and
pull the pin right here
on the desk, okay?
And then you looked at
it, you know, a thousandth
of second later, what you'd
see is all these fragments
going off.
And you'd notice that the ones
that were moving
fastest were the ones
that were farthest away.
Of course, because
they're moving fastest.
They've gotten farthest away.
So you know, you
would say, well, gosh.
Two things.
It was obviously some
sort of explosion
to push them, to push them.
Yeah, and now they're
all moving away from it.
And that's exactly
what it looked
like had happened
to the universe.
Enormous controversy
about this for,
at least 30, 40 years, okay?
But now, we say yes, this
describes the universe.
>> Noory: Most astronomers
believe that.
>> Shostak: Oh, I
think that yes.
It's very hard to find
somebody who doesn't believe
in the Big Bang anymore
because what it did is it made
some predictions.
>> Noory: Okay, but
what -- what blew up?
Let's agree for a moment
there was that explosion.
Could it have been, for
example, an object so huge
that the remnants of it,
the blown up remnants of it,
happens to be everything
we see in the universe?
>> Shostak: Yeah, well then
it would have to have kind
of like the mass of
everything in the universe.
>> Noory: Absolutely.
>> Shostak: That's a big thing.
That doesn't seem to be one
of the favorite theories
of cosmologists these days.
Look, there are a
lot of theories.
And nobody knows which is right
or if any of them is right.
So the bottom line
is, we don't know.
We really don't know.
It does seem to be the case that
if you could just twist time
and space the right way,
right here, where you
and I are sitting here talking,
just twist it the right way --
>> Noory: Just a little bit.
>> Shostak: -- you
would create a Big Bang
that would produce
another universe.
I don't know if that would
make you feel better the rest
of the day, right?
If you could create a universe.
>> Noory: I'll be thinking
about that all day.
>> Shostak: Yes!
And there are physicists who
sort of try and figure out,
well, could that have been
the cause of our Big Bang?
Could there have
been other Big Bangs?
Very fashionable
these days to think
that our Big Bang is just one
of many because to say that,
you could say well, gee,
we're not even special.
Our whole universe is not even
special, let alone our planet.
>> Noory: So there
are many universes?
>> Shostak: There might
be many universes.
The reason that's interesting,
it solves a problem.
And the problem is,
our universe seems
to be nicely set up for life.
>> Noory: Right.
>> Shostak: You have stars,
you have planets, you know,
you have liquid water.
You have all this stuff.
That means that we're here.
But, you know, the
laws of physics.
Why are they just like that?
And you know, the only
answer people can come
up with is well God
made it that way.
That's not going to
be good enough --
>> Noory: That's not
going to hold water.
>> Shostak: That's
not going to --
yeah, hold water
for the physicists.
So you need to come
up with another --
well, another idea is you
make zillions of universes.
And most of them are bad.
Again, they're like
lottery tickets, right?
Most of them are bad.
But there are a couple --
>> Noory: All but one.
>> Shostak: Yeah, if you
had zillions of them,
then there are winners in there.
And we're in a winner.
>> Noory: These universes
that might be out there,
why can't we see them
now, from this universe?
>> Shostak: The problem is we're
trapped in our own in a way.
I mean, these things
might have --
we have three dimensions of
space, one dimension of time,
I mean, at least
that we're aware of.
You know, these might
have two mentions of space
or 12 dimensions of
space or who knows what?
And so they're, you know, it's
-- maybe think of it this way.
All these universes
might be like bubbles
in a bubble bath, right?
>> Noory: Right.
All stuck to each other.
>> Shostak: They might be stuck
to each other or they might not.
But in any case, you're
in one of those bubbles,
here are all these
other bubbles out there,
but you can't see them.
You're cut off from them.
So -- but I have to
say that physicists
in particular are pretty clever
about trying to think of a way
that you could see if --
not see them directly,
at least see their
effects, their influence.
Because if you could
do that, then you could
at least prove the idea
that there are multiverses.
>> Noory: Well, inasmuch as our
universe is endless, let's say,
why do we even have to
conceive of other universes?
If this thing goes on
forever, isn't that enough?
>> Shostak: Well, I don't know?
Is it enough for you?
I mean, I think it would be
really interesting to know
that Big Bangs happen
all the time.
That sort of tells you
that there wasn't a
beginning to all of this.
And that's philosophically
interesting
because now it looks like, you
know, I mean, my niece comes
up to me and she says: So
what was there, you know,
14 and 1 billion years ago?
>> Noory: Exactly.
>> Shostak: Right.
You know, what there
before the Big Bang.
>> Noory: That's
a great question.
>> Shostak: Exactly.
And I tell her, look
Becca, you know.
That question doesn't make sense
because there was no
time before the Big Bang.
Time came as part
of the universe.
>> Noory: But her little
brain can't figure it out.
>> Shostak: She walks away.
>> Noory: Nor can mine.
>> Shostak: Nor mine.
I mean, nobody can
figure that out.
And if you have, you know, new
Big Bangs going on all the time,
then you can say, look,
there was never a beginning.
It's always been this way.
There's some sort
of meta-universe.
And all these Big Bangs go off
and they make these universes.
And they, you know, they
produce stars, some of them.
Some of them.
The good ones.
>> Noory: And then planets.
>> Shostak: The planets.
They produce George
Noory, right?
And then after 100 billion
years, all the stars die.
They expand.
And everything gets
cold and dark
and the last black
holes evaporate.
But they're still there.
>> Noory: But there's
another universe.
>> Shostak: They're just dead.
That's it.
There's a little bit of action,
and then there's an
infinite amount of time
where there's no action.
It sounds like a bad
movie, doesn't it?
And that's all there is to it.
And it happens all the time.
It would be interesting.
>> Noory: It would be.
That's fascinating.
And then you add in
the life equation.
What the heck is it?
>> Shostak: Yeah.
>> Noory: What does it all mean?
I mean, here we are
talking to each other.
What's it all about, Alphie?
>> Shostak: Yes.
I don't think Alphie
ever figured it out.
I don't think -- you know,
this is up to you
and the Lord, George.
I mean, honestly it is, because
on the one hand you can say
that we're here for a purpose.
And that's one point of view.
And then maybe we are.
>> Noory: And a good point.
>> Shostak: Yeah.
>> Noory: I think.
>> Shostak: That's
one point of view.
The other -- but then again,
you've got to ask, you know,
are the opossums here
for a purpose, too?
And you know, they're probably
asking themselves that question.
Or you could say, look,
you know, we're just a bit
of dirty chemistry
that happens to go on,
self-organizing chemistry.
And you know, it does its think.
>> Noory: Which I won't accept.
>> Shostak: Yeah, well.
>> Noory: I can't accept that.
>> Shostak: Yeah, nobody
knows any more than that.
I mean, we don't know.
>> Noory: I mean,
you're a scientist.
Do you struggle between
accepting the chemistry theory
and the intelligent
design theory?
>> Shostak: Well, I don't
have a great deal of sympathy
for intelligent design
because it seems
that you can explain all of
the evolution on earth or the,
you know, species we
have, even the beginnings
of life just using
the laws of nature.
And if you can do that, then I'm
kind of reticent to say, well,
let's just throw all that out
and we'll just invoke, you know,
there was intelligent design.
Something designed this, okay?
But does that mean
that, you know,
you don't believe
in God or religion?
And that's a different
question, actually.
And it's -- yeah, it's tough
to try and find what you --
you know, how you
reconcile that.
And I can't say that
I've been successful.
But you know, I tend
to trust science
because when science is wrong,
usually science corrects itself.
>> Noory: Say I'd like to know
how this little tiny particles
and organisms and little amoebas
and molecules all got together
to begin to form
us, for example.
>> Shostak: Yeah.
Well, you can -- I mean, that's
a question you could answer.
You know, if you say
look, I'm just going
to give you a whole
bunch of potions
with single-celled organisms.
And you know, will
it ever be the case
that eventually they start
sticking to one another
or engulfing one another?
>> Noory: Or multiplying and
doing this and doing that.
>> Shostak: Yeah, and then you
get something a little more
complex and so forth and so on.
Well, that happened.
You know, for the first 4 --
or 3 1/2 billion years of life
on earth, there was nothing
that you could see
without a microscope.
I mean, they were
all single-celled.
And eventually they
did get together.
And that suggests that
if you wait long enough,
it might happen.
>> Noory: But look
at the design.
Who would come up with this
instrument called the human body
that would give you a couple
eyes so you could see all
around you, that would give you
a nose so you could smell all
ears so you could hear things,
that would give you a
mouth so you could talk
and communicate and eat?
Who in the heck would come
up with something like that?
>> Shostak: Well, I
think you're suggesting
that it was designed that way.
And if it's true,
then they ought
to revoke the engineering
license because we barely work.
I mean, I wouldn't have
believed that when I was a kid.
But, you know, at a certain age
you realize you barely work.
The design is all --
>> Noory: What I mean, is -- but
look at the parts that function.
>> Shostak: Yeah,
they barely function.
I mean, your eyes really --
>> Noory: You think.
>> Shostak: Yeah, your
eye's not so good.
I mean, you've got that, you
know, the optic nerve comes
out on your retina,
right in front there.
That's terrible.
It makes a blind spot.
>> Noory: Well, maybe we're
still going through this change.
>> Shostak: Well,
I'm sure we are.
But I will point out
that eyes, for example --
I mean, eyes are very useful
if you're a living critter,
particularly if you're
an animal.
>> Noory: No question.
>> Shostak: Plants don't need
to go chase down their dinner.
But if you're an animal,
you do need to chase
down your dinner in many cases.
And so eyes really help.
And they also help you avoid
being somebody else's dinner.
>> Noory: Could you
imagine doing this show
if your mouth wasn't there?
>> Shostak: Yeah.
Well, it would be
somewhat less interesting.
>> Noory: It wouldn't
work, yeah.
There's some smarts to it.
>> Shostak: Well, I've
got to say, though,
that eyes have appeared many
different times in the history
of the biology of earth.
So they were, if you
will, invented many times.
>> Noory: Yes.
>> Shostak: So, you know, that
suggests, look, it's so useful
that if by accident you
produce cells that, you know,
twitch a little bit when there's
some light, that that turns
out to be incrementally
valuable.
>> Noory: But they have
to be in the right place.
Of course, I wouldn't
mind one behind me.
That would be nice.
>> Shostak: Yeah [laughs].
>> Noory: Let's take another
call here for Seth Shostak
from the SETI Institute.
>> Hello Seth.
My name is Ben.
And I was wondering if you
could give me some information
about the millions of stars
I see in the sky each night.
>> Noory: The names.
>> Shostak: The many --
>> Noory: Information
about all those stars.
How come there's so many?
>> Shostak: How come
there's so many?
Yeah, well, it turns out that
interstellar space is pretty
good at making stars.
It's pretty fertile.
Look, the galaxy is
just a big blob --
it started out as
a big blob of gas.
Now you probably don't
remember that because that was
like 13 billion years
ago, right?
This big blob of gas.
But it turns out that, you
know, just physics really.
The places where the gas
is a little bit thicker,
they begin to sort of collapse
under their own weight.
And that, you know,
it sort of breaks up
and you get more collapses.
And you start making stars.
So that's how the
stars were made.
We understand that
reasonably well actually,
how stars are made.
That there's so many of them,
well, there was a lot of gas.
I mean, that, you know, the
number of stars in the part
of the universe we can see,
if you need that number
for your next cocktail party,
that's 10,000 billion billion.
10,000 billion billion.
One followed by 22 zeros, okay?
That's the number
that we can see.
But of course, if you went to
that farthest galaxy and looked
out in the same direction,
you'd see more galaxies.
So, you know, the number stars
in the entire universe
could even be infinite.
>> Noory: Would you say
that the law of physics,
how planets are developed,
how the star systems are
developed, are all the same?
>> Shostak: It seems to be.
And you can test that.
Astronomers can test that.
But they look at
a distant galaxy
and they look at the light.
And they can see
the light is broken
up by these what are
called spectral lines.
And so a technical story, but
it turns out, you know, oh,
there's sodium and
there's, you know, calcium
and there's hydrogen and helium.
It's all the same stuff.
And it also means that the
laws of physics are the same
because those atoms are doing
the same thing up there --
>> Noory: They're spinning
around the same way.
>> Shostak: They're doing
the same thing they do here.
>> Noory: Isn't that remarkable?
>> Shostak: It is.
It is. And it might not
have to be that way.
It might be that there
are parts of the universe
where things are a
little different,
the laws are a little different.
And it would be hard
to determine.
But one thing you can say is
if they are different somewhere
else, it's either very far away
or the difference is so small
that we can't measure
it as of today.
>> Noory: Some of the pictures
of space that we've seen
through Hubble, like
the Horsehead Nebula
and other things that
look like breeding pods.
They actually look like they're
breeding pods for star systems.
>> Shostak: Yes.
>> Noory: Is that possible?
>> Shostak: Yeah.
No, you actually do see that.
Yeah, you see these
little small little --
they look like drops of
goo or something like that.
>> Noory: Yeah.
>> Shostak: In my view,
they're not so small.
They might be a couple
of light years across.
So, you know, that's
trillions of miles across.
But from a distance
they look small.
And those are indeed the
birthplaces of new stars, yeah.
>> Noory: I love it.
It's like a nesting place.
>> Shostak: Exactly.
>> Noory: One of
my favorite photos,
the deep field picture
that Hubble took.
>> Shostak: Yeah.
>> Noory: Of more galaxies
than you could imagine
in a little tiny dot.
>> Shostak: Yes, exactly.
The first Hubble deep field
photo was a bit of sky covered
up with a pin head, you know?
Kind of like that.
And you can see hundreds,
maybe thousands
of galaxies in there, right?
And you can just say, okay.
What if I look over
here, you know?
Will I get the same
sort of picture?
And you do.
>> Noory: And you do.
>> Shostak: And no matter
where you point the camera,
you'll see the same
sort of thing.
So that means the entire sky
has, within a pinhead, you know,
thousands of galaxies.
>> Noory: More than
they ever imagined.
>> Shostak: So that means the
number of galaxies is, again,
the ones you can see,
is like 150 billion.
>> Noory: 150 billion galaxies.
>> Shostak: Yeah, and each one
might have a trillion planets.
So, those are big numbers.
>> Noory: There's
a lot out there.
>> Shostak: Yeah,
There's a lot going on.
>> Noory: Would you like to be
around a million years from now?
What kind of knowledge
would you have?
>> Shostak: Yeah.
You know, I wonder if my tennis
game would have gotten any
better by then.
>> Noory: God, I hope so.
Based on what I hear.
>> Shostak: I'd certainly
like to see what's
happened, certainly.
A million years from now is
far enough into the future
that things should
be very different.
But on the other hand, you know,
the earth isn't that much older.
So it isn't that the earth
has gone away or, you know,
it's been cooked by the
sun or anything like that.
It would be very interesting
to see what's happened to us,
if we're still around.
You know, the average lifetime
for a species is
roughly a million years.
So would we still
be here or not?
Yeah, I'd like to know.
>> Noory: What do you think our
little cousin planet Mars looked
like a long time ago?
>> Shostak: Well, that's
a real subject of study.
In fact, a lot of my colleagues
at the SETI Institute are
trying to figure that out.
And, you know, that's why
these rovers are on there, too.
>> Noory: Yeah.
>> Shostak: They're not
so much to look for life.
They're not doing
that directly yet.
What they're looking for is the
history because they figure,
look, Mars looks
pretty sterile now.
The atmosphere's the wrong kind.
It's very thin.
It's really cold.
It's dry, there's
dust, whatever.
There's no liquid
water on the surface.
You take that cup of water,
whatever it is, you take that,
pour onto the surface of Mars.
>> Noory: Whatever it is.
>> Shostak: Whatever
it is, some liquid.
And because it's mostly water --
and I'll immediately sublimate.
It'll be like dry ice.
It'll just go psht!
That's it.
>> Noory: It's gone, yeah.
>> Shostak: But it
wasn't always that way.
We know it wasn't
always that way.
Four billion years ago
if you'd gone to Mars,
you might have seen
lakes, maybe even oceans,
rivers, things like that.
>> Noory: Would you
have seen vegetation?
>> Shostak: That's
the big question.
Would you?
We don't know.
>> Noory: Maybe.
>> Shostak: Maybe, maybe.
And of course, you know,
if like got started
on Mars before it got started
on Earth, it's conceivable,
no proof for this, but it's
conceivable that, you know,
some rock got kicked off
Mars, landed on Earth,
which was sterile at the
time and infected us.
>> Noory: And struck us.
And it went everywhere.
>> Shostak: And we're
the descendants of that.
>> Noory: What do you
think happened to Mars,
assuming it had an ocean,
it had an atmosphere.
What happened?
>> Shostak: Yeah.
Mars went bad sort of like --
>> Noory: It went south fast.
>> Shostak: Yeah, it was some
of the neighborhood kids.
It went bad.
And the reason it went bad,
largely, is because it's small.
So it's losing a little bit
of its atmosphere because,
you know, it doesn't have
quite as much gravity.
Also it looks like some
big rock sailed by Mars,
just like a rock slammed
into the Earth [inaudible].
Some rock sailed by Mars
and sort of striped a lot
of the atmosphere away.
But fundamentally, it was small.
It was losing its atmosphere,
and also, because it's small,
it didn't have as
much internal heat.
You know, the Earth is
still warm from its birth.
>> Noory: That's right.
>> Shostak: Right?
You go down into a
mine, it gets warm.
You go down a hundred miles and
it becomes, you know, the --
>> Noory: It's hot.
>> Shostak: Yeah!
It's really hot, okay?
And that's what drives plate
tectonics, produces volcanoes.
And those volcanoes are
belching up, you know,
gases from the inside, right?
So we keep replenishing
our atmosphere
with something, anyhow.
Well Mars stopped doing that.
I mean, Mars had volcanoes.
There are big volcanic
cones on Mars.
But there's been no action
there for a really long time.
So, and that's just
because it was small,
didn't have so much heat.
And if it had, you know, a
bigger -- if had been bigger,
if Mars had only been --
>> Noory: It might
have been like us.
>> Shostak: Hadn't been
the runt of the litter,
it might have done better.
>> Noory: Interesting.
Let's take another
question for you Seth.
Here we go.
Listen in.
>> Hello Seth.
This is Don.
And I wanted to know if
we have definitive proof
that ET life exists among us?
>> Noory: Well, another
good question for you.
A believer.
He believes that there
is ET life, but not here.
>> Shostak: Yeah, well, he
wants to know if we have
that definitive -- look,
all I can say to that,
you know that I'm
skeptical they're visiting.
>> Noory: Absolutely.
>> Shostak: And if they
were here, if they were sort
of like Men in Black, you
know, they were, I don't know,
selling contraband cigarettes
on the streets of New York.
I mean, if they had --
obviously, you know,
we would probably
stop doing SETI.
I mean, it would be
much more interesting
to find the aliens here
than to find out --
>> Noory: Wouldn't have
to listen for them.
>> Shostak: Yeah,
you listen for them
from 500 light years
away or something.
So I think that that evidence
is just not good enough.
I mean, a lot of
people believe it is.
But I'm not one of them.
And you haven't convinced many
scientists, I have to say.
The usual thing I get
when I point that out is,
people say you guys,
you scientists,
you have closed minds.
Or, there is good evidence,
but, you know, it's stacked
up by the government somewhere.
>> Noory: Would you be in shock
if we found definitive proof
that said that they were here,
they helped build the pyramids,
they did all these
other wonderful things?
>> Shostak: Yeah.
I get that a lot about the
pyramids, I have to say.
And the first time I was
in Australia giving a talk
and some guy in the
audience said:
So who do you think
built the pyramids?
I was so stunned that I
turned around and I said:
Who do you think
built the pyramids?
He said: Well, aliens.
And I said: Well, I've
got this radical theory.
I think they were built
by Egyptians, right?
>> Noory: [Inaudible].
>> Shostak: [Inaudible]
Yes, he's --
>> Noory: Whoever he is.
>> Shostak: I was going to say,
he's made a career out of that.
But I have to say that these
people were not stupid.
And in stacking limestone blocks
on the planes outside of Cairo,
I mean, you can do that.
And they could do that.
They could do that.
So I don't think that
that's very good evidence.
I mean, I think if they
were really here, right,
you would have, I know, things
like this would happen to you.
I mean, you know, I was just
at the airport yesterday.
And you're sitting
there in the plane
and occasionally the pilot
would come on and say:
You know, well, look Seth.
There's some unidentified craft
in the area -- Well, not Seth.
>> Noory: It's going
to gobble us up.
>> Shostak: Well, we don't
know what they're going to do.
But they didn't file a flight
plan so the FAA says we've got
to stay here at the gate for a
while until they clear the area.
Never happens.
When you have real
invasions like,
well the Spaniards
invading Peru.
You know, the Incas
weren't in doubt
about whether they
were being invaded.
>> Noory: Let's take
another question for Seth.
They keep rolling in.
Here we go.
>> Hi Seth.
This is Terry.
I was wondering how the
Milky Way came to be.
>> Noory: Yeah.
How did the Milky
Way come to be?
>> Shostak: Yeah?
Our galaxy.
Well, I mean, that's --
>> Noory: How did
galaxies come to be?
Why are they all spread
around all over the place?
>> Shostak: One of the big
research questions in astronomy.
You could get a grant from the
National Science Foundation
to study that, George,
if you want.
I mean, just in very crude
terms, what we think is --
okay, there's a Big Bang.
It blows out all this stuff.
It's very hot.
The early moments
of the universe,
the first three minutes,
the whole universe is
like the inside of
an H bomb, you know?
Not great.
Okay. But then eventually
it cools off.
And after a couple
hundred thousand years,
you get atoms and so forth.
And so you have all these clouds
of material, stuff,
matter, okay?
And because it's not exactly
perfectly uniform, you know,
it's a little clumpier --
>> Noory: Clumpy
here, clumpy there.
>> Shostak: And a
little clumpy there.
And those clumps begin to
form big clusters of galaxies,
which also then sort
of sub-clump.
And those fall in on themselves
and they produce starts
and things we call galaxies.
Because once you
start that, you know,
they hold the whole thing
together with gravity.
I mean, galaxies are just
held together by gravity.
>> Noory: So you
think what they were,
they're remnant of the Big Bang.
>> Shostak: Yes.
>> Noory: In clumps.
The galaxies are the result
of clumpiness in the Big Bang.
And that's a problem because --
>> Noory: Lots of
clumps out there.
>> Shostak: You need to have
clumps right at the beginning
of the Big Bang, You
know, the first fraction
of a second, you
need clumpiness.
And it's very tiny.
It's very hot and you sort
of wonder how can
you get clumpiness?
And that's, you know
that's the question.
Part of it is just due to what's
called the uncertainty principle
in physics that, you know,
not everything can be
in the same place at the same --
I mean, you can't have uniform,
perfect uniformity,
apparently you can't have.
But it's a big question.
>> Noory: Why are some
objects 14 billion years old
and others are 4 1/2
billion years old?
>> Shostak: Well, you're always
building new stuff, right?
We've seen stars that, you know,
are only a couple of
million years old.
Because, you know,
there was still --
there's still leftover
gas out there.
It hasn't all be used up.
Not by a long shot.
Most of it's still out there
leftover from the Big Bang.
And it still clumps
and makes new stars.
So you can find stars
that are very young,
in astronomical terms, a
couple of million years.
There was just a planet
found recently wandering
between the stars.
And that planet's probably
only about a million years old.
Our sun and the eight, now,
planets, around our sun,
they were all formed more
or less at the same time,
4 1/2 billion years ago.
So we're the new
kids on the block.
>> Noory: Now, will there
be other star systems born a
billion years from now?
>> Shostak: Yes, yes.
You'll still be making
stars for a while.
>> Noory: Will it ever stop.
>> Shostak: Yes, it does stop.
That's the bad news.
The good news is
there's [inaudible]--
>> Noory: When it
stops, is that it for us?
>> Shostak: Well, yes.
I mean, not -- for us, that's
going to take tens of billions
of years before you start
to really slow the
rate of star formation.
>> Noory: Okay.
>> Shostak: And eventually after
a hundred billion or, you know,
a trillion years, essentially
no new stars are being made.
>> Noory: And the universe dies.
>> Shostak: The stars all burn
out, so it gets dark, right?
Our sun is going to turn
into a charcoal briquette.
I mean, a big one.
>> Noory: In about five
billion years, right?
>> Shostak: Well, it begins the
process in five billion years.
>> Noory: I used to worry about
that, by the way, in school.
>> Shostak: Well, you could.
>> Noory: I was.
I was scared.
My teacher would say
the sun's going to burn
out in five billion years.
And I'd go home crying.
It was not a good feeling.
>> Shostak: I hope
you don't continue
to send this teacher
Christmas cards.
>> Noory: No, he's passed on.
>> Shostak: Oh, okay.
>> Noory: He's in the hereafter.
He's now part of coast to coast.
>> Shostak: Yeah, okay.
Well, yes.
But that's really
going to happen.
But you know, it isn't
the end of everything.
I mean, things still happen.
But people have worked out
sort of how long does that go
on before nothing more happens.
Because there comes a
point after a google years.
So that's a one followed
by a hundred zeros.
>> Noory: Zeros.
That's a long time.
>> Shostak: That's a big number.
That's a very long time.
But after that, then the
last of the black holes,
really big black holes, they
evaporate and that's it.
And after that, nothing happens.
There's not enough energy
in the universe anywhere
that you can get it together
and roast a marshmallow.
I mean, nothing's happening.
>> Noory: And then we move
on to the next universe.
>> Shostak: No, our
universe stays there.
It's still expanding.
It may even be accelerating.
>> Noory: Will it go dark?
>> Shostak: It is dark.
It's just a soup
of cold particles.
Everything is dark.
Nothing's happening anywhere.
You can look everywhere
for a party.
There are not parties.
There's none.
>> Noory: So the sun,
would sun be there
in shape even though
it would be burned out?
>> Shostak: Probably it
will have worked its way
into a big black hole in the
center of the galaxy by then.
If not, it's just a
lump of coal, mostly.
>> Noory: Right.
>> Shostak: Yeah.
That's it.
>> Noory: But dark,
totally dark.
>> Shostak: Dark,
dark, dark, dark, dark.
You don't get to see anything.
>> Noory: And you
can't see anything.
It's like closing your eyes.
>> Shostak: Well, you
know, you could look
for a little bit
of residual heat.
But, you know, the universe has
expanded so much that, you know,
you can't see galaxies nearby.
The galaxies themselves
have all collided.
The stars have collided and made
a big black hole in the center.
So they're just big black holes.
And then they evaporate.
And then it's just this swoop,
a soup of very tiny
particles not doing much.
But the thing about
that is, you might say,
that's kind of boring.
But, you know, what
happens after that?
Nothing happens after that.
It stays that way, not
just for a billion years
or a trillion years
or a gazillion years.
It stays that way
forever, expanding.
>> Noory: Yeah.
>> Shostak: So here's the
history of the cosmos.
This Big Bang -- Bam!
You know, a hundred billion
years of stars, planets,
late night radio, whatever.
And then there's an
infinity forever,
forever, of nothingness.
So it's pssht!
Infinity of nothingness.
You've got to ask yourself,
so what's the point of that?
>> Noory: Does it ever
contract and blow up again?
>> Shostak: It could,
in principle.
But in practice, you
can look at the --
that depends on how much
stuff there is per, you know,
cubic yard or something
like that.
And it turns out
there's not enough
to suggest that's
going to happen.
At the moment we'd say the
big crunch, not in our future.
>> Noory: Let's take
one more call for you.
Seth Shostak, last call.
>> Hi Seth.
I'm Eileen from New Hampshire.
I'm wondering if you think
that there are more planets
that have not been
discovered yet.
>> Noory: Oh, of course.
>> Shostak: You bet, Eileen.
>> Noory: Billions
and billions more.
>> Shostak: Oh, and
more than that even.
Yes. Well, I can
give you the numbers.
As of last night, more or less,
we found about a thousand
confirmed planets.
These are not just,
oh, the data look good.
There might a planet there.
>> Noory: In our galaxy?
>> Shostak: Oh, they're
all pretty --
yeah, they're reasonably close,
within a few hundred light years
in general, in general.
NASA's Kepler spacecraft, which
has been sending down data
for the last four years,
has found at least roughly 3,000
additional planetary candidates.
They're not confirmed, but
probably 80 or 90 percent
of them will turn
out to be planets.
There are another
couple of thousand.
And there are more Kepler data.
Kepler itself is --
>> Noory: More, more, more.
>> Shostak: Yeah.
So by two years from today,
we'll say that we have found
on the order of 5,000 planets.
And you might think
that's a big number.
But that's actually not
the interesting number.
The interesting number is what
fraction of stars have planets.
>> Noory: And if
that's a high percent?
>> Shostak: And it's
a high percent --
it is a high percentage.
In fact you talk with
people who do this
for a living and
they'll tell you.
>> Noory: It's the
same primordial soup.
>> Shostak: Yeah.
>> Noory: The playbook
is the same.
>> Shostak: Planets everywhere.
Planets are -- they're
like fire hydrants.
They're everywhere.
>> Noory: I think it's great.
If people want more information
on SETI, what do they do, Seth?
>> Shostak: Well, I mean, they
can go to their local library.
Or they can go to
SETI.org on the Web.
>> Noory: Perfect.
>> Shostak: That's what
[inaudible] right now.
>> Noory: And keep going.
You've got a good
array of telescopes.
Find the signal.
>> Shostak: I'll let
you know, George.
>> Noory: Seth Shostak.
I'm George Noory.
You've been listening to
Beyond Belief  as we talk
and explore all the various
aspects of this universe.
And what you just heard
today is that there are more
than just one universe.
We have many, many
more right here,
somewhere out there
in the cosmos.
Seth, again, thank you so much.
It's always a pleasure
talking to you.
>> Shostak: I enjoyed it.
>> Noory: And tune in on our
next  Beyond Belief  program.
[ Music ]